# DBS-Effects
**Purpose:** This study examined speech changes induced by deep-brain stimulation (DBS) in speakers with Parkinson’s disease (PD) using a set of auditory-perceptual and acoustic measures.

**Method:** Three speaker groups participated in the study, one group of speakers with PD and with DBS (PD-DBS group) and two reference groups, (1) speakers with PD and without DBS (PD group) and (2) neurologically healthy speakers. Auditory-perceptual ratings included voice quality, articulation precision, prosody, speech intelligibility, and listening effort obtained from 44 listeners. Acoustic measures were made for voicing proportion, second formant frequency slope, vowel dispersion, articulation rate, and range of fundamental frequency and intensity. 

**Results:** No significant changes were found between DBS-On and DBS-Off for the five perceptual ratings. Four of six acoustic measures revealed significant differences between the two conditions. While articulation rate and acoustic vowel dispersion increased, voicing proportion and intensity range decreased from the DBS-Off to DBS-On condition. However, a visual examination of the data indicated that the statistical significance was mostly driven by a small number of participants, while the majority did not show a consistent pattern of such changes. 

**Conclusions:** Our data, in general, indicate no-to-minimal changes in speech production ensued from DBS. The findings are discussed with a focus on large interspeaker variability in PD in terms of their speech characteristics and the potential effects of DBS on speech. 
